<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 25</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">

<h3>CHAPTER XXV</h3>
<h2><i>I HEAR FROM UNCLE SILAS</i></h2>
<p>Without saying a word, Cousin Monica accompanied me to the
school-room, and on entering she shut the door, not with a
spirited clang, but quietly and determinedly.</p>
<p>'Well, dear,' she said, with the same pale, excited countenance,
'that certainly is a sensible and charitable arrangement.
I could not have believed it possible, had I not heard it with
my ears.'</p>
<p>'About my going to Bartram-Haugh?'</p>
<p>'Yes, exactly so, under Silas Ruthyn's guardianship, to spend
two—<i>three</i>—of the most important years of your education and
your life under that roof. Is <i>that</i>, my dear, what was in your
mind when you were so alarmed about what you were to be
called upon to do, or undergo?'</p>
<p>'No, no, indeed. I had no notion what it might be. I was
afraid of something serious,' I answered.</p>
<p>'And, my dear Maud, did not your poor father speak to you as
if it <i>was</i> something serious?' said she. 'And so it <i>is</i>, I can tell
you, something serious, and <i>very</i> serious; and I think it ought to
be prevented, and I certainly <i>will</i> prevent it if I possibly can.'</p>
<p>I was puzzled utterly by the intensity of Lady Knollys' protest.
I looked at her, expecting an explanation of her meaning; but
she was silent, looking steadfastly on the jewels on her right-hand
fingers, with which she was drumming a staccato march
on the table, very pale, with gleaming eyes, evidently thinking
deeply. I began to think she <i>had</i> a prejudice against my uncle
Silas.</p>
<p>'He is not very rich,' I commenced.</p>
<p>'Who?' said Lady Knollys.</p>
<p>'Uncle Silas,' I replied.</p>
<p>'No, certainly; he's in debt,' she answered.</p>
<p>'But then, how very highly Doctor Clay spoke of him!' I pursued.</p>
<p>'Don't talk of Doctor Clay. I do think that man is the greatest
goose I ever heard talk. I have no patience with such men,'
she replied.</p>
<p>I tried to remember what particular nonsense Doctor Clay had
uttered, and I could recollect nothing, unless his eulogy upon
my uncle were to be classed with that sort of declamation.</p>
<p>'Danvers is a very proper man and a good accountant, I dare say;
but he is either a very deep person, or a fool—<i>I</i> believe
a fool. As for your attorney, I suppose he knows his business, and
also his interest, and I have no doubt he will consult it. I begin
to think he best man among them, the shrewdest and the most reliable,
is that vulgar visionary in the black wig. I saw him look at you, Maud,
and I liked his face, though it is abominably ugly and vulgar, and
cunning, too; but I think he's a just man, and I dare say with
right feelings—I'm <i>sure</i> he has.'</p>
<p>I was quite at a loss to divine the gist of my cousin's criticism.</p>
<p>'I'll have some talk with Dr. Bryerly; I feel convinced he
takes my view, and we must really think what had best be
done.'</p>
<p>'Is there anything in the will, Cousin Monica, that does not appear?'
I asked, for I was growing very uneasy. 'I wish you would tell me. What
view do you mean?'</p>
<p>'No view in particular; the view that a desolate old park, and the house
of a <i>neglected</i> old man, who is very poor, and has been desperately
foolish, is not the right place for you, particularly at your years. It is
quite shocking, and I <i>will</i> speak to Doctor Bryerly. May I ring
the bell, dear?'</p>
<p>'Certainly;' and I rang it.</p>
<p>'When does he leave Knowl?'</p>
<p>I could not tell. Mrs. Rusk, however, was sent for, and she could tell us
that he had announced his intention of taking the night train from
Drackleton, and was to leave Knowl for that station at half-past
six o'clock.</p>
<p>'May Rusk give or send him a message from me, dear?' asked Lady Knollys.</p>
<p>Of course she might.</p>
<p>'Then please let him know that I request he will be so good
as to allow me a very few minutes, just to say a word before he
goes.'</p>
<p>'You kind cousin!' I said, placing my two hands on her
shoulders, and looking earnestly in her face; 'you are anxious
about me, more than you say. Won't you tell me why? I am
much more unhappy, really, in ignorance, than if I understood
the cause.'</p>
<p>'Well, dear, haven't I told you? The two or three years of
your life which are to form you are destined to be passed in
utter loneliness, and, I am sure, neglect. You can't estimate
the disadvantage of such an arrangement. It is full of disadvantages.
How it could have entered the head of poor Austin—although
I should not say that, for I am sure I do understand it,—but
how he could for any purpose have directed such a measure
is quite inconceivable. I never heard of anything so foolish
and abominable, and I will prevent it if I can.'</p>
<p>At that moment Mrs. Rusk announced that Doctor Bryerly
would see Lady Knollys at any time she pleased before his
departure.</p>
<p>'It shall be this moment, then,' said the energetic lady, and
up she stood, and made that hasty general adjustment before
the glass, which, no matter under what circumstances, and before
what sort of creature one's appearance is to be made, is a
duty that every woman owes to herself. And I heard her a moment
after, at the stair-head, directing Branston to let Dr. Bryerly
know that she awaited him in the drawing-room.</p>
<p>And now she was gone, and I began to wonder and speculate.
Why should my cousin Monica make all this fuss about,
after all, a very natural arrangement? My uncle, whatever he
might have been, was now a good man—a religious man—perhaps
a little severe; and with this thought a dark streak fell across
my sky.</p>
<p>A cruel disciplinarian! had I not read of such characters?—lock
and key, bread and water, and solitude! To sit locked up
all night in a dark out-of-the-way room, in a great, ghosty, old-fashioned
house, with no one nearer than the other wing. What
years of horror in one such night! Would not this explain my
poor father's hesitation, and my cousin Monica's apparently
disproportioned opposition? When an idea of terror presents
itself to a young person's mind, it transfixes and fills the vision,
without respect of probabilities or reason.</p>
<p>My uncle was now a terrible old martinet, with long Bible
lessons, lectures, pages of catechism, sermons to be conned by
rote, and an awful catalogue of punishments for idleness, and
what would seem to him impiety. I was going, then, to a frightful
isolated reformatory, where for the first time in my life I
should be subjected to a rigorous and perhaps barbarous discipline.</p>
<p>All this was an exhalation of fancy, but it quite overcame
me. I threw myself, in my solitude, on the floor, upon my knees,
and prayed for deliverance—prayed that Cousin Monica might
prevail with Doctor Bryerly, and both on my behalf with the
Lord Chancellor, or the High Sheriff, or whoever else my proper
deliverer might be; and when my cousin returned, she found me
quite in an agony.</p>
<p>'Why, you little fool! what fancy has taken possession of you
now?' she cried.</p>
<p>And when my new terror came to light, she actually laughed
a little to reassure me, and she said—</p>
<p>'My dear child, your uncle Silas will never put you through
your duty to your neighbour; all the time you are under his
roof you'll have idleness and liberty enough, and too much, I
fear. It is neglect, my dear, not discipline, that I'm afraid of.'</p>
<p>'I think, dear Cousin Monica, you are afraid of something
more than neglect,' I said, relieved, however.</p>
<p>'I <i>am</i> afraid of more than neglect,' she replied promptly;
'but I hope my fears may turn out illusory, and that possibly
they may be avoided. And now, for a few hours at least, let us
think of something else. I rather like that Doctor Bryerly. I
could not get him to say what I wanted. I don't think he's
Scotch, but he is very cautious, and I am sure, though he would
not say so, that he thinks of the matter exactly as I do. He says
that those fine people, who are named as his co-trustees, won't
take any trouble, and will leave everything to him, and I am
sure he is right. So we must not quarrel with him, Maud, nor
call him hard names, although he certainly is intolerably vulgar
and ugly, and at times very nearly impertinent—I suppose without
knowing, or indeed very much caring.'</p>
<p>We had a good deal to think of, and talked incessantly. There
were bursts and interruptions of grief, and my kind cousin's
consolations. I have often since been so lectured for giving way
to grief, that I wonder at the patience exercised by her during
this irksome visit. Then there was some reading of that book
whose claims are always felt in the terrible days of affliction.
After that we had a walk in the yew garden, that quaint little
cloistered quadrangle—the most solemn, sad, and antiquated of
gardens.</p>
<p>'And now, my dear, I must really leave you for two or three
hours. I have ever so many letters to write, and my people must
think I'm dead by this time.'</p>
<p>So till tea-time I had poor Mary Quince, with her gushes of
simple prattle and her long fits of vacant silence, for my companion.
And such a one, who can con over by rote the old
friendly gossip about the dead, talk about their ways, and looks,
and likings, without much psychologic refinement, but with a
simple admiration and liking that never measured them critically,
but always with faith and love, is in general about as comfortable
a companion as one can find for the common moods of
grief.</p>
<p>It is not easy to recall in calm and happy hours the sensations
of an acute sorrow that is past. Nothing, by the merciful ordinance
of God, is more difficult to remember than pain. One or
two great agonies of that time I do remember, and they remain
to testify of the rest, and convince me, though I can see it no
more, how terrible all that period was.</p>
<p>Next day was the funeral, that appalling necessity; smuggled
away in whispers, by black familiars, unresisting, the beloved
one leaves home, without a farewell, to darken those doors no
more; henceforward to lie outside, far away, and forsaken,
through the drowsy heats of summer, through days of snow and
nights of tempest, without light or warmth, without a voice
near. Oh, Death, king of terrors! The body quakes and the
spirit faints before thee. It is vain, with hands clasped over our
eyes, to scream our reclamation; the horrible image will not
be excluded. We have just the word spoken eighteen hundred
years ago, and our trembling faith. And through the broken
vault the gleam of the Star of Bethlehem.</p>
<p>I was glad in a sort of agony when it was over. So long as it
remained to be done, something of the catastrophe was still
suspended. Now it was all over.</p>
<p>The house so strangely empty. No owner—no master! I with
my strange momentary liberty, bereft of that irreplaceable love,
never quite prized until it is lost. Most people have experienced
the dismay that underlies sorrow under such circumstances.</p>
<p>The apartment of the poor outcast from life is now dismantled.
Beds and curtains taken down, and furniture displaced; carpets
removed, windows open and doors locked; the bedroom and
anteroom were henceforward, for many a day, uninhabited.
Every shocking change smote my heart like a reproach.</p>
<p>I saw that day that Cousin Monica had been crying for the
first time, I think, since her arrival at Knowl; and I loved her
more for it, and felt consoled. My tears have often been arrested
by the sight of another person weeping, and I never could explain
why. But I believe that many persons experience the same
odd reaction.</p>
<p>The funeral was conducted, in obedience to his brief but
peremptory direction, very privately and with little expense.
But of course there was an attendance, and the tenants of the
Knowl estate also followed the hearse to the mausoleum, as it is
called, in the park, where he was laid beside my dear mother.
And so the repulsive ceremonial of that dreadful day was over.
The grief remained, but there was rest from the fatigue of agitation,
and a comparative calm supervened.</p>
<p>It was now the stormy equinoctial weather that sounds the
wild dirge of autumn, and marches the winter in. I love, and
always did, that grand undefinable music, threatening and bewailing,
with its strange soul of liberty and desolation.</p>
<p>By this night's mail, as we sat listening to the storm, in the
drawing-room at Knowl, there reached me a large letter with
a great black seal, and a wonderfully deep-black border, like
a widow's crape. I did not recognise the handwriting; but on
opening the funereal missive, it proved to be from my uncle
Silas, and was thus expressed:—</p>
<p> </p>
<p>'M<small>Y</small> D<small>EAREST</small> N<small>IECE</small>,—This letter will reach you, probably, on
the day which consigns the mortal remains of my beloved
brother, Austin, your dear father, to the earth. Sad ceremony,
from taking my mournful part in which I am excluded by years,
distance, and broken health. It will, I trust, at this season of
desolation, be not unwelcome to remember that a substitute,
imperfect—unworthy—but most affectionately zealous, for the
honoured parent whom you have just lost, has been appointed,
in me, your uncle, by his will. I am aware that you were present
during the reading of it, but I think it will be for our mutual
satisfaction that our new and more affectionate relations should
be forthwith entered upon. My conscience and your safety, and
I trust convenience, will thereby be consulted. You will, my dear
niece, remain at Knowl, until a few simple arrangements shall
have been completed for your reception at this place. I will then
settle the details of your little journey to us, which shall be performed
as comfortably and easily as possible. I humbly pray
that this affliction may be sanctified to us all, and that in our
new duties we may be supported, comforted, and directed. I
need not remind you that I now stand to you <i>in loco parentis</i>,
which means in the relation of father, and you will not forget
that you are to remain at Knowl until you hear further from me.</p>
<p>'I remain, my dear niece, your most affectionate uncle and
guardian,</p>
<p class="signature">S<small>ILAS</small> R<small>UTHYN</small>.'</p>
<p>'P.S.—Pray present my respects to Lady Knollys, who, I
understand, is sojourning at Knowl. I would observe that a
lady who cherishes, I have reason to fear, unfriendly feelings
against your uncle, is not the most desirable companion for his
ward. But upon the express condition that I am not made the
subject of your discussions—a distinction which could not
conduce to your forming a just and respectful estimate of me—I
do not interpose my authority to bring your intercourse to an
immediate close.'</p>
<p> </p>
<p>As I read this postscript, my cheek tingled as if I had received
a box on the ear. Uncle Silas was as yet a stranger. The menace
of authority was new and sudden, and I felt with a pang of mortification
the full force of the position in which my dear father's
will had placed me.</p>
<p>I was silent, and handed the letter to my cousin, who read it
with a kind of smile until she came, as I supposed, to the postscript,
when her countenance, on which my eyes were fixed,
changed, and with flushed cheeks she knocked the hand that
held the letter on the table before her, and exclaimed—</p>
<p>'Did I ever hear! Well, if this isn't impertinence! <i>What</i> an
old man that is!'</p>
<p>There was a pause, during which Lady Knollys held her head
high with a frown, and sniffed a little.</p>
<p>'I did not intend to talk about him, but now I <i>will</i>. I'll talk
away just whatever I like; and I'll stay here just as long as you
let me, Maud, and you need not be one atom afraid of him. Our
intercourse to an "immediate close," indeed! I only wish he
were here. He should hear something!'</p>
<p>And Cousin Monica drank off her entire cup of tea at one
draught, and then she said, more in her own way—</p>
<p>'I'm better!' and drew a long breath, and then she laughed
a little in a waggish defiance. 'I wish we had him here, Maud,
and <i>would</i> not we give him a bit of our minds! And this before
the poor will is so much as proved!'</p>
<p>'I am almost glad he wrote that postscript; for although I
don't think he has any authority in that matter while I am under
my own roof,' I said, extemporising a legal opinion, 'and, therefore,
shan't obey him, it has somehow opened my eyes to my real
situation.'</p>
<p>I sighed, I believe, very desolately, for Lady Knollys came
over and kissed me very gently and affectionately.</p>
<p>'It really seems, Maud, as if he had a supernatural sense, and
heard things through the air over fifty miles of heath and hill.
You remember how, just as he was probably writing that very
postscript yesterday, I was urging you to come and stay with
me, and planning to move Dr. Bryerly in our favour. And so I
will, Maud, and to me you <i>shall</i> come—my guest, mind—I should
be so delighted; and really if Silas is under a cloud, it has been
his own doing, and I don't see that it is your business to fight
his battle. He can't live very long. The suspicion, whatever it is
dies with him, and what could poor dear Austin prove by his
will but what everybody knew quite well before—his own strong
belief in Silas's innocence? What an awful storm! The room
trembles. Don't you like the sound? What they used to call
'wolving' in the old organ at Dorminster!'</p>
</section></body></html>