<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX: Monica Knollys</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="volume-1" id="chapter-1-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">Monica Knollys</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Punctually Lady Knollys arrived. She was accompanied by her nephew, Captain Oakley.</p>
			<p>They arrived a little before dinner; just in time to get to their rooms and dress. But Mary Quince enlivened my toilet with eloquent descriptions of the youthful Captain whom she had met in the gallery, on his way to his room, with the servant, and told me how he stopped to let her pass, and how “he smiled so ’ansom.”</p>
			<p>I was very young then, you know, and more childish even than my years; but this talk of Mary Quince’s interested me, I must confess, considerably. I was painting all sort of portraits of this heroic soldier, while affecting, I am afraid, a hypocritical indifference to her narration, and I know I was very nervous and painstaking about my toilet that evening. When I went down to the drawing-room, Lady Knollys was there, talking volubly to my father as I entered⁠—a woman not really old, but such as very young people fancy aged⁠—energetic, bright, saucy, dressed handsomely in purple satin, with a good deal of lace, and a rich point⁠—I know not how to call it⁠—not a cap, a sort of headdress⁠—light and simple, but grand withal, over her greyish, silken hair.</p>
			<p>Rather tall, by no means stout, on the whole a good firm figure, with something kindly in her look. She got up, quite like a young person, and coming quickly to meet me with a smile⁠—</p>
			<p>“My young cousin!” she cried, and kissed me on both cheeks. “You know who I am? Your cousin Monica⁠—Monica Knollys⁠—and very glad, dear, to see you, though she has not set eyes on you since you were no longer than that paper-knife. Now come here to the lamp, for I must look at you. Who is she like? Let me see. Like your poor mother, I think, my dear; but you’ve the Aylmer nose⁠—yes⁠—not a bad nose either, and, come! very good eyes, upon my life⁠—yes, certainly something of her poor mother⁠—not a bit like you, Austin.”</p>
			<p>My father gave her a look as near a smile as I had seen there for a long time, shrewd, cynical, but kindly too, and said he⁠—</p>
			<p>“So much the better, Monica, eh?”</p>
			<p>“It was not for me to say⁠—but you know, Austin, you always were an ugly creature. How shocked and indignant the little girl looks! You must not be vexed, you loyal little woman, with Cousin Monica for telling the truth. Papa was and will be ugly all his days. Come, Austin, dear, tell her⁠—is not it so?”</p>
			<p>“What! depose against myself! That’s not <span epub:type="z3998:nationality">English</span> law, Monica.”</p>
			<p>“Well, maybe not; but if the child won’t believe her own eyes, how is she to believe me? She has long, pretty hands⁠—you have⁠—and very nice feet too. How old is she?”</p>
			<p>“How old, child?” said my father to me, transferring the question.</p>
			<p>She recurred again to my eyes.</p>
			<p>“That is the true grey⁠—large, deep, soft⁠—very peculiar. Yes, dear, very pretty⁠—long lashes, and such bright tints! You’ll be in the Book of Beauty, my dear, when you come out, and have all the poet people writing verses to the tip of your nose⁠—and a very pretty little nose it is!”</p>
			<p>I must mention here how striking was the change in my father’s spirit while talking and listening to his odd and voluble old Cousin Monica. Reflected from bygone associations, there had come a glimmer of something, not gaiety, indeed, but like an appreciation of gaiety. The gloom and inflexibility were gone, and there was an evident encouragement and enjoyment of the incessant sallies of his bustling visitor.</p>
			<p>How morbid must have been the tendencies of his habitual solitude, I think, appeared from the evident thawing and brightening that accompanied even this transient gleam of human society. I was not a companion⁠—more childish than most girls of my age, and trained in all his whimsical ways, never to interrupt a silence, or force his thoughts by unexpected question or remark out of their monotonous or painful channel.</p>
			<p>I was as much surprised at the good-humour with which he submitted to his cousin’s saucy talk; and, indeed, just then those black-panelled and pictured walls, and that quaint, misshapen room, seemed to have exchanged their stern and awful character for something wonderfully pleasanter to me, notwithstanding the unpleasantness of the personal criticism to which the plainspoken lady chose to subject me.</p>
			<p>Just at that moment Captain Oakley joined us. He was my first actual vision of that awful and distant world of fashion, of whose splendours I had already read something in the three-volumed gospel of the circulating library.</p>
			<p>Handsome, elegant, with features almost feminine, and soft, wavy, black hair, whiskers and moustache, he was altogether such a knight as I had never beheld, or even fancied, at Knowl⁠—a hero of another species, and from the region of the demigods. I did not then perceive that coldness of the eye, and cruel curl of the voluptuous lip⁠—only a suspicion, yet enough to indicate the profligate man, and savouring of death unto death.</p>
			<p>But I was young, and had not yet the direful knowledge of good and evil that comes with years; and he was so very handsome, and talked in a way that was so new to me, and was so much more charming than the well-bred converse of the humdrum county families with whom I had occasionally sojourned for a week at a time.</p>
			<p>It came out incidentally that his leave of absence was to expire the day after tomorrow. A Lilliputian pang of disappointment followed this announcement. Already I was sorry to lose him. So soon we begin to make a property of what pleases us.</p>
			<p>I was shy, but not awkward. I was flattered by the attention of this amusing, perhaps rather fascinating, young man of the world; and he plainly addressed himself with diligence to amuse and please me. I dare say there was more effort than I fancied in bringing his talk down to my humble level, and interesting me and making me laugh about people whom I had never heard of before, than I then suspected.</p>
			<p>Cousin Knollys meanwhile was talking to papa. It was just the conversation that suited a man so silent as habit had made him, for her frolic fluency left him little to supply. It was totally impossible, indeed, even in our taciturn household, that conversation should ever flag while she was among us.</p>
			<p>Cousin Knollys and I went into the drawing-room together, leaving the gentlemen⁠—rather ill-assorted, I fear⁠—to entertain one another for a time.</p>
			<p>“Come here, my dear, and sit near me,” said Lady Knollys, dropping into an easy chair with an energetic little plump, “and tell me how you and your papa get on. I can remember him quite a cheerful man once, and rather amusing⁠—yes, indeed⁠—and now you see what a bore he is⁠—all by shutting himself up and nursing his whims and fancies. Are those your drawings, dear?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, very bad, I’m afraid; but there are a few, <em>better</em>, I think in the portfolio in the cabinet in the hall.”</p>
			<p>“They are by <em>no</em> means bad, my dear; and you play, of course?”</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—that is, a little⁠—pretty well, I hope.”</p>
			<p>“I dare say. I must hear you by-and-by. And how does your papa amuse you? You look bewildered, dear. Well, I dare say, amusement is not a frequent word in this house. But you must not turn into a nun, or worse, into a puritan. What is he? A Fifth-Monarchy-man, or something⁠—I forget; tell me the name, my dear.”</p>
			<p>“Papa is a Swedenborgian, I believe.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes⁠—I forgot the horrid name⁠—a Swedenborgian, that is it. I don’t know exactly what they think, but everyone knows they are a sort of pagans, my dear. He’s not making one of <em>you</em>, dear⁠—is he?”</p>
			<p>“I go to church every Sunday.”</p>
			<p>“Well, that’s a mercy; Swedenborgian is such an ugly name, and besides, they are all likely to be damned, my dear, and that’s a serious consideration. I really wish poor Austin had hit on something else; I’d much rather have no religion, and enjoy life while I’m in it, than choose one to worry me here and bedevil me hereafter. But some people, my dear, have a taste for being miserable, and provide, like poor Austin, for its gratification in the next world as well as here. Ha, ha, ha! how grave the little woman looks! Don’t you think me very wicked? You know you do; and very likely you are right. Who makes your dresses, my dear? You <em>are</em> such a figure of fun!”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rusk, I think, ordered <em>this</em> dress. I and Mary Quince planned it. I thought it very nice. We all like it very well.”</p>
			<p>There was something, I dare say, very whimsical about it, probably very absurd, judged at least by the canons of fashion, and old Cousin Monica Knollys, in whose eye the <span epub:type="z3998:place">London</span> fashions were always fresh, was palpably struck by it as if it had been some enormity against anatomy, for she certainly laughed very heartily; indeed, there were tears on her cheeks when she had done, and I am sure my aspect of wonder and dignity, as her hilarity proceeded, helped to revive her merriment again and again as it was subsiding.</p>
			<p>“There, you mustn’t be vexed with old Cousin Monica,” she cried, jumping up, and giving me a little hug, and bestowing a hearty kiss on my forehead, and a jolly little slap on my cheek. “Always remember your cousin Monica is an outspoken, wicked old fool, who likes you, and never be offended by her nonsense. A council of three⁠—you all sat upon it⁠—<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rusk, you said, and Mary Quince, and your wise self, the weird sisters; and Austin stepped in, as Macbeth, and said, ‘What is’t ye do?’ you all made answer together, ‘A something or other without a name!’ Now, seriously, my dear, it is quite unpardonable in Austin⁠—your papa, I mean⁠—to hand you over to be robed and bedizened according to the whimsies of these wild old women⁠—aren’t they old? If they know better, it’s positively <em>fiendish</em>. I’ll blow him up⁠—I will indeed, my dear. You know you’re an heiress, and ought not to appear like a jack-pudding.”</p>
			<p>“Papa intends sending me to <span epub:type="z3998:place">London</span> with Madame and Mary Quince, and going with me himself, if Doctor Bryerly says he may make the journey, and then I am to have dresses and everything.”</p>
			<p>“Well, that is better. And who is Doctor Bryerly⁠—is your papa ill?”</p>
			<p>“Ill! oh, no; he always seems just the same. You don’t think him ill⁠—<em>looking</em> ill, I mean?” I asked eagerly and frightened.</p>
			<p>“No, my dear, he looks very well for his time of life; but why is Doctor What’s-his-name here; Is he a physician, or a divine, or a horse-doctor? and why is his leave asked?”</p>
			<p>“I⁠—I really don’t understand.”</p>
			<p>“Is he a what d’ye call’em⁠—a Swedenborgian?”</p>
			<p>“I believe so.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I see; ha, ha, ha! And so poor Austin must ask leave to go up to town. Well, go he shall, whether his doctor likes it or not, for it would not do to send you there in charge of your Frenchwoman, my dear. What’s her name?”</p>
			<p>“Madame de la Rougierre.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
